Update observability doc structure and content (#35816)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/cluster/configure-manage-dashboard.md

:::{note}
At the moment, Ray Dashboard is only intended for interactive development and debugging because dashboard UI and the underlying data are not accessible any more after the clusters are terminated. For production monitoring and debugging, users should rely on [persisted logs](../cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/logging.md), [persisted metrics](./metrics.md), [persisted Ray states](../ray-observability/user-guides/cli-sdk.rst), and other observability tools.
:::

## Changing Ray Dashboard Port
Ray Dashobard runs on port `8265` of the head node. Follow the instructions below to customize the port if needed.

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Single-node local cluster
**Start the cluster explicitly with CLI** <br/>
Pass the ``--dashboard-port`` argument with ``ray start`` in the command line.

**Start the cluster implicitly with `ray.init`** <br/>
Pass the keyword argument ``dashboard_port`` in your call to ``ray.init()``.
:::

:::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher
To be added
:::

:::{tab-item} Kuberay

> View [specifying non-default ports](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/config.html#specifying-non-default-ports) page for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
View the [specifying non-default ports](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/config.html#specifying-non-default-ports) page for details.
```

:::

::::

> ## Viewing Ray Dashboard in browsers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Viewing the Ray Dashboard in browsers
```

Author: No change here?

Reviewer: Please disregard.

When you start a single-node Ray cluster on your laptop, you can access the dashboard through a URL printed when Ray is initialized (the default URL is `http://localhost:8265`).

> When you start a remote Ray cluster via the {ref}`VM cluster launcher <vm-cluster-quick-start>`, {ref}`KubeRay operator <kuberay-quickstart>` or manual configuration, Ray Dashboard will be launched on the head node but the dashboard port may not be publicly exposed. Additional setup is needed if you want to access the Ray Dashboard from outside the head node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you start a remote Ray cluster via the {ref}`VM cluster launcher <vm-cluster-quick-start>`, {ref}`KubeRay operator <kuberay-quickstart>` or manual configuration, the Ray Dashboard is launched on the head node but the dashboard port may not be publicly exposed. You need an additional set up to access the Ray Dashboard from outside the head node.
```

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher
**Port forwarding** <br/>

> You can securely port-forward local traffic to the dashboard via the ``ray

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can securely port-forward local traffic to the dashboard with the ``ray
```

dashboard`` command.

```shell
$ ray dashboard [-p <port, 8265 by default>] <cluster config file>
```

The dashboard is now be visible at ``http://localhost:8265``.
:::

:::{tab-item} Kuberay

> The KubeRay operator makes the dashboard available via a Service targeting the Ray head pod, named ``<RayCluster name>-head-svc``. You can access the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The KubeRay operator makes the dashboard available via a Service targeting the Ray head pod, named ``<RayCluster name>-head-svc``. Access the
```

dashboard from within the Kubernetes cluster at ``http://<RayCluster name>-head-svc:8265``.

> **Add Ingress rule**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Adding an ingress rule**
```

> 

Author: Need input from @kevin85421

Reviewer 2: Do you mean https://github.com/ray-project/kuberay/blob/master/docs/guidance/ingress.md?

Author: I think so. This is to address the comment left by @DmitriGekhtman

**Port forwarding** <br/>
You can also view the dashboard from outside the Kubernetes cluster by using port-forwarding:

```{admonition} Note
:class: note

> It's not recommended to use port forwarding if you need have specific network security requirements. Follow the instructions below to add ingress rules to expose Ray Dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's not recommended to use port forwarding if you have specific network security requirements. Follow the instructions below to add ingress rules to expose Ray Dashboard
```

```

```shell
$ kubectl port-forward service/raycluster-autoscaler-head-svc 8265:8265
```
For more information about configuring network access to a Ray cluster on Kubernetes, see the {ref}`networking notes <kuberay-networking>`.

:::

::::

> ## Running Behind a Reverse Proxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running behind a reverse proxy
```

Ray dashboard should work out-of-the-box when accessed via a reverse proxy. API requests don't need to be proxied individually.

Always access the dashboard with a trailing ``/`` at the end of the URL.
For example, if your proxy is set up to handle requests to ``/ray/dashboard``, view the dashboard at ``www.my-website.com/ray/dashboard/``.

> The dashboard now sends HTTP requests with relative URL paths. Browsers will handle these requests as expected when the ``window.location.href`` ends in a trailing ``/``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dashboard sends HTTP requests with relative URL paths. Browsers will handle these requests as expected when the ``window.location.href`` ends in a trailing ``/``.
```

This is a peculiarity of how many browsers handle requests with relative URLs, despite what [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/What_is_a_URL#examples_of_relative_urls) defines as the expected behavior.

Make your dashboard visible without a trailing ``/`` by including a rule in your reverse proxy that redirects the user's browser to ``/``, i.e. ``/ray/dashboard`` --> ``/ray/dashboard/``.

Below is an example with a [traefik](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/getting-started/quick-start/) TOML file that accomplishes this:

```yaml
[http]
  [http.routers]
    [http.routers.to-dashboard]
      rule = "PathPrefix(`/ray/dashboard`)"
      middlewares = ["test-redirectregex", "strip"]
      service = "dashboard"
  [http.middlewares]
    [http.middlewares.test-redirectregex.redirectRegex]
      regex = "^(.*)/ray/dashboard$"
      replacement = "${1}/ray/dashboard/"
    [http.middlewares.strip.stripPrefix]
      prefixes = ["/ray/dashboard"]
  [http.services]
    [http.services.dashboard.loadBalancer]
      [[http.services.dashboard.loadBalancer.servers]]
        url = "http://localhost:8265"
```

## Disabling the Dashboard

> Dashboard is included if you use `ray[default]`, `ray[air]` or {ref}`other installation commands <installation>` and automatically started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dashboard is included if you use `ray[default]`, `ray[air]`, or {ref}`other installation commands <installation>` and automatically started.
```

To disable the dashboard, use the following arguments `--include-dashboard`.

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Single-node local cluster

> **Start the cluster explicitly with CLI** <br/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Start the cluster explicitly with the CLI** <br/>
```

Reviewer: Are you open to shortening the tab titles in the tab to something like `CLI` and an equivalent term for  `ray.init`? I don't know what the appropriate term for the `ray.init` parameter would be, but it would make the tab titles cleaner.

Author: Which tab title are you referring to?  `Start the cluster explicitly with CLI` is not a tab title.

Reviewer: I see. I was confused. Please ignore.

```bash
ray start --include-dashboard=False
```

**Start the cluster implicitly with `ray.init`** <br/>

```{testcode}
:hide:

import ray
ray.shutdown()
```

```{testcode}
import ray
ray.init(include_dashboard=False)
```

:::

> :::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher
```

Author: No change?

Reviewer: You're right. I am experiencing some delay with GH so I must've repeated an edit. Please ignore and apologies.

> To disable the dashboard while using the {ref}`VM cluster launcher <vm-cluster-quick-start>`, include the `ray start --head --include-dashboard=False` argument

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable Dashboard while using the {ref}`VM Cluster Launcher <vm-cluster-quick-start>`, include the `ray start --head --include-dashboard=False` argument
```

in the `head_start_ray_commands` section of the [cluster launcher's YAML file](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/0574620d454952556fa1befc7694353d68c72049/python/ray/autoscaler/aws/example-full.yaml#L172).
:::

:::{tab-item} Kuberay

> To be added

Author: Yes. We need to. Asked @kevin85421 about it.

> To be added

Reviewer 2: See this [gist](https://gist.github.com/kevin85421/0e6a8dd02c056704327d949b9ec96ef9) as an example.

* Set `spec.headGroupSpec.rayStartParams.include-dashboard` to `"False"`.

```sh
# Prepare a Kubernetes cluster
kind create cluster --image=kindest/node:v1.23.0

# Install a KubeRay operator
helm install kuberay-operator kuberay/kuberay-operator --version 0.5.0

# Create a RayCluster without dashboard.
kubectl apply -f ${The Gist}

# Log in to the head Pod and test the port 8265.
export HEAD_POD=$(kubectl get pods --selector=ray.io/node-type=head -o custom-columns=POD:metadata.name --no-headers)
kubectl exec -it $HEAD_POD -- bash
sudo apt-get update; sudo apt-get install -y curl
curl 127.0.0.1:8265
# Expected output: curl: (7) Failed to connect to 127.0.0.1 port 8265: Connection refused
```

<img width="701" alt="Screen Shot 2023-05-31 at 9 22 30 PM" src="https://github.com/ray-project/ray/assets/20109646/1af6e797-ab63-4dc1-b65d-e10be134c639">

I strongly recommend that KubeRay users do not disable the dashboard, as some KubeRay features depend on it.

:::
::::

> ## Viewing Built-in Dashboard API Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Viewing built-in Dashboard API metrics
```

> The dashboard is powered by a server that serves both the UI code and the data about the cluster via API endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dashboard is powered by a server that serves both the UI code and the data about the cluster via API endpoints.
```

> There are basic Prometheus metrics that are emitted for each of these API endpoints:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray emits basic Prometheus metrics for each API endpoint:
```

`ray_dashboard_api_requests_count_requests_total`: Collects the total count of requests. This is tagged by endpoint, method, and http_status.

`ray_dashboard_api_requests_duration_seconds_bucket`: Collects the duration of requests. This is tagged by endpoint and method.

For example, you can view the p95 duration of all requests with this query:

```text

histogram_quantile(0.95, sum(rate(ray_dashboard_api_requests_duration_seconds_bucket[5m])) by (le))
```

> These metrics can be queried via Prometheus or Grafana UI. Instructions on how to set these tools up can be found {ref}`here <observability-visualization-setup>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can query these metrics from the Prometheus or Grafana UI. Find instructions on how to set these tools up {ref}`here <observability-visualization-setup>`.
```

(observability-visualization-setup)=
## Integrating with Prometheus and Grafana

> Optional integration with Prometheus and Grafana enables 2 valuable features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The optional integration with Prometheus and Grafana enables two valuable features:
```

> - Default Grafana dashboard templates provided by Ray that visualize the important system metrics for monitoring and debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to default Grafana dashboard templates provided by Ray to visualize key system metrics for monitoring and debugging.
```

> - View the time-series metrics in Ray Dashboard directly via embedded Grafana visualizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Embedding of Grafana visualizations in Ray Dashboard to view the time-series metrics.
```

> For better Ray Dashboard experience, i.e., viewing time-series metrics, users need to set up Prometheus and Grafana and integrate them with Ray Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the enhanced Ray Dashboard experience, like viewing time-series metrics, set up Prometheus and Grafana to integrate with Ray Dashboard.
```

Reviewer: Should we provide a link to the instructions?

Author: Yeah. we should

### Setting up Prometheus

> Prometheus is needed to scrape metrics from Ray clusters for rendering Grafana visualizations. Follow {ref}`the instructions <prometheus-setup>` to set up your Prometheus server and starts to scrape system and application metrics from Ray clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To render Grafana visualizations, you need Prometheus to scrape metrics from Ray clusters. Follow {ref}`the instructions <prometheus-setup>` to set up your Prometheus server and start to scrape system and application metrics from Ray Clusters.
```

(grafana)=
### Setting up Grafana

> Grafana is a tool that supports more advanced visualizations of prometheus metrics and allows you to create custom dashboards with your favorite metrics. Ray exports some default configurations which include a default Grafana dashboard showing some of the most valuable metrics for debugging ray applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Grafana is a tool that supports advanced visualizations of Prometheus metrics and allows you to create custom dashboards with your favorite metrics. Ray exports some default configurations, which include a default Grafana dashboard showing some of the most valuable metrics for debugging Ray applications.
```

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Single-node local cluster

```{admonition} Note
:class: note

> The instructions below describe one way of setting up Grafana on your local machine. View Grafana documentation for more comprehensive info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The instructions below describe one way of setting up Grafana on your local machine. Refer to the Grafana documentation for more comprehensive information.
```

```

First, [download Grafana](https://grafana.com/grafana/download). Follow the instructions on the download page to download the right binary for your operating system.

> Then go to to the location of the binary and run grafana using the built in configuration found in `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/grafana` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to to the location of the binary and run Grafana using the built-in configuration found in the `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/grafana` folder.
```

```shell
./bin/grafana-server --config /tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/grafana/grafana.ini web
```

> Now, you can access grafana using the default grafana url, `http://localhost:3000`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Access Grafana using the default grafana URL, `http://localhost:3000`.
```

> You can then see the default dashboard by going to dashboards -> manage -> Ray -> Default Dashboard. The same {ref}`metric graphs <system-metrics>` are also accessible via {ref}`Ray Dashboard <observability-getting-started>` after you integrate Grafan with Ray Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the default dashboard by going to dashboards -> manage -> Ray -> Default Dashboard. The same {ref}`metric graphs <system-metrics>` are accessible in {ref}`Ray Dashboard <observability-getting-started>` after you integrate Grafana with Ray Dashboard.
```

```{admonition} Note
:class: note

> If this is your first time using Grafana, you can login with the username: `admin` and password `admin`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this is your first time using Grafana, login with the username: `admin` and password `admin`.
```

```

![grafana login](images/graphs.png)

:::

> :::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher & KubeRay

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher and KubeRay
```

View Grafana documentation for the best strategy to set up your Grafana Server (e.g., whether to use a central Grafana instance).

After your Grafana serve is running, find the Ray-provided default Grafana dashboard JSON at `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/grafana/dashboards/default_grafana_dashboard.json`. [Import this dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/manage-dashboards/#import-a-dashboard) to your Grafana.

> If Grafana reports that datasource is not found, you can [add a datasource variable](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/variables/add-template-variables/?pg=graf&plcmt=data-sources-prometheus-btn-1#add-a-data-source-variable) and using [JSON model view](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/build-dashboards/modify-dashboard-settings/#view-dashboard-json-model) change all values of `datasource` key in the imported `default_grafana_dashboard.json` to the name of the variable. For example, if the variable name is `data_source`, all `"datasource"` mappings should be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Grafana reports that datasource is not found, [add a datasource variable](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/variables/add-template-variables/?pg=graf&plcmt=data-sources-prometheus-btn-1#add-a-data-source-variable) and using [JSON model view](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/dashboards/build-dashboards/modify-dashboard-settings/#view-dashboard-json-model), change all values of `datasource` key in the imported `default_grafana_dashboard.json` to the name of the variable. For example, if the variable name is `data_source`, all `"datasource"` mappings should be:
```

```json
"datasource": {
  "type": "prometheus",
  "uid": "$data_source"
  }
```
:::

::::

### Embed Grafana visualizations into Ray Dashboard

> In order to view embedded time-series visualizations in Ray Dashboard, additional setup is needed so that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To view embedded time-series visualizations in Ray Dashboard, the following must be set up:
```

1. The head node of the cluster is able to access Prometheus and Grafana
2. The browser of the dashboard user is able to access Grafana. 

> Configure these settings using the `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST`, `RAY_PROMETHEUS_HOST`, and `RAY_GRAFANA_IFRAME_HOST` environment variables when you start the Ray clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure these settings using the `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST`, `RAY_PROMETHEUS_HOST`, and `RAY_GRAFANA_IFRAME_HOST` environment variables when you start the Ray Clusters.
```

* Set `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST` to an address that the head node can use to access Grafana. Head node does health checks on Grafana on the backend.
* Set `RAY_PROMETHEUS_HOST` to an address the head node can use to access Prometheus.

> * Set`RAY_GRAFANA_IFRAME_HOST` to an address that the user's browsers can use to access Grafana and embed visualizations. If not set, `RAY_GRAFANA_IFRAME_HOST` uses the value of `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set`RAY_GRAFANA_IFRAME_HOST` to an address that the user's browsers can use to access Grafana and embed visualizations. If `RAY_GRAFANA_IFRAME_HOST` not set, Ray Dashboard uses the value of `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST`.
```

For example, if the IP of the head node is 55.66.77.88 and Grafana is hosted on port 3000. Set the value to `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST=55.66.77.88:3000`.

> If all the env vars are set properly, you should be able to see time-series metrics in {ref}`Ray Dashboard <observability-getting-started>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all the environment variables are set properly, you should see time-series metrics in {ref}`Ray Dashboard <observability-getting-started>`.
```

#### Alternate Prometheus host location

> By default, we assume Prometheus is hosted at `localhost:9090`. You can choose to run Prometheus on a non-default port or on a different machine. When doing so, you should make sure that Prometheus can scrape the metrics from your ray nodes following instructions {ref}`here <scrape-metrics>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Ray Dashboard assumes Prometheus is hosted at `localhost:9090`. You can choose to run Prometheus on a non-default port or on a different machine. In this case, make sure that Prometheus can scrape the metrics from your Ray nodes following instructions {ref}`here <scrape-metrics>`.
```

> Then, configure `RAY_PROMETHEUS_HOST` env var properly as stated above. For example, if Prometheus is hosted at port 9000 on a node with ip 55.66.77.88, One should set the value to `RAY_PROMETHEUS_HOST=http://55.66.77.88:9000`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, configure `RAY_PROMETHEUS_HOST` environment variable properly as stated above. For example, if Prometheus is hosted at port 9000 on a node with ip 55.66.77.88, set `RAY_PROMETHEUS_HOST=http://55.66.77.88:9000`.
```

#### Alternate Grafana host location
By default, we assume Grafana is hosted at `localhost:3000` You can choose to run Grafana on a non-default port or on a different machine as long as the head node and the browsers of dashboard users can access it.

If Grafana is exposed via nginx ingress on a Kubernetes cluster, the following line should be present in the Grafana ingress annotation:

```yaml
  nginx.ingress.kubernetes.io/configuration-snippet: |
      add_header X-Frame-Options SAMEORIGIN always;
```

> When both Grafana and Ray cluster are on the same Kubernetes cluster, it is important to set `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST` to the external URL of the Grafana ingress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When both Grafana and the Ray Cluster are on the same Kubernetes cluster, set `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST` to the external URL of the Grafana ingress.
```

#### User authentication for Grafana

> When the Grafana instance requires user authentication, the following settings have to be in its `configuration file <https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/>`_ to correctly embed in Ray dashboard:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Grafana instance requires user authentication, the following settings have to be in its `configuration file <https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/>`_ to correctly embed in Ray Dashboard:
```

```ini
  [security]
  allow_embedding = true
  cookie_secure = true
  cookie_samesite = none
```

#### Troubleshooting

> ##### Getting Grafana to use the Ray configurations when installed via homebrew on macOS X

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Using Ray configurations in Grafana with Homebrew on macOS X
```

> With homebrew, Grafana is installed as a service that is automatically launched for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Homebrew installs Grafana as a service that is automatically launched for you.
```

Therefore, to configure these services, you cannot simply pass in the config files as command line arguments.

> Instead, update `/usr/local/etc/grafana/grafana.ini` file so that it matches the contents of `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/grafana/grafana.ini`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, update `/usr/local/etc/grafana/grafana.ini` file so that it matches the contents of `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/grafana/grafana.ini`.
```
```suggestion
Instead, update the `/usr/local/etc/grafana/grafana.ini` file so that it matches the contents of `/tmp/ray/session_latest/metrics/grafana/grafana.ini`.
```

You can then start or restart the services with `brew services start grafana` and `brew services start prometheus`.

##### Grafana dashboards are not embedded in the Ray dashboard
If you're getting an error that says `RAY_GRAFANA_HOST` is not setup despite having set it up, check that:

> You've included the protocol in the URL (e.g., `http://your-grafana-url.com` instead of `your-grafana-url.com`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You've included the protocol in the URL (e.g., `http://your-grafana-url.com` instead of `your-grafana-url.com`).
```

> The URL doesn't have a trailing slash (e.g., `http://your-grafana-url.com` instead of `http://your-grafana-url.com/`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The URL doesn't have a trailing slash (e.g., `http://your-grafana-url.com` instead of `http://your-grafana-url.com/`).
```

:::{note}
At the moment, Ray Dashboard is only intended for interactive development and debugging because dashboard UI and the underlying data are not accessible any more after the clusters are terminated. For production monitoring and debugging, users should rely on [persisted logs](../cluster/kubernetes/user-guides/logging.md), [persisted metrics](./metrics.md), [persisted Ray states](../ray-observability/user-guides/cli-sdk.rst), and other observability tools.
:::

## Changing Ray Dashboard Port
Ray Dashobard runs on port `8265` of the head node. Follow the instructions below to customize the port if needed.

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Single-node local cluster
**Start the cluster explicitly with CLI** <br/>
To customize the port on which the dashboard runs, pass
the ``--dashboard-port`` argument with ``ray start`` in the command line.

**Start the cluster implicitly with `ray.init`** <br/>
Pass the keyword argument ``dashboard_port`` in your call to ``ray.init()``.
:::

:::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher

> To be added

Author: @rkooo567 can you write a few sentences for this? The 2.4 doc about it is wrong.

:::

## Changing the Ray Dashboard port
Ray Dashboard runs on port `8265` of the head node. Follow the instructions below to customize the port if needed.

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Single-node local cluster
**Start the cluster explicitly with CLI** <br/>
Pass the ``--dashboard-port`` argument with ``ray start`` in the command line.

**Start the cluster implicitly with `ray.init`** <br/>
Pass the keyword argument ``dashboard_port`` in your call to ``ray.init()``.
:::

:::{tab-item} VM Cluster Launcher
Include the ``--dashboard-port`` argument in the `head_start_ray_commands` section of the Cluster Launcher YAML file.
```yaml
head_start_ray_commands: 
  - ray stop 
  # Replace ${YOUR_PORT} with the port number you need.
  - ulimit -n 65536; ray start --head --dashboard-port=${YOUR_PORT} --port=6379 --object-manager-port=8076 --autoscaling-config=~/ray_bootstrap_config.yaml 

> 

Author: @rkooo567 What do you think?

Author: Done

For example, you can view the p95 duration of all requests with this query:

```text

histogram_quantile(0.95, sum(rate(ray_dashboard_api_requests_duration_seconds_bucket[5m])) by (le))
```

You can query these metrics from the Prometheus or Grafana UI. Find instructions on how to set these tools up {ref}`here <observability-visualization-setup>`.

(observability-visualization-setup)=
## Integrating with Prometheus and Grafana
The optional integration with Prometheus and Grafana enables two features:
- Access to default Grafana dashboard templates provided by Ray to visualize key system metrics for monitoring and debugging.
- Embedding of Grafana visualizations in Ray Dashboard to view the time-series metrics.

For the enhanced Ray Dashboard experience, like viewing time-series metrics, set up Prometheus and Grafana to integrate with Ray Dashboard.

### Setting up Prometheus
To render Grafana visualizations, you need Prometheus to scrape metrics from Ray clusters. Follow {ref}`the instructions <prometheus-setup>` to set up your Prometheus server and start to scrape system and application metrics from Ray Clusters.

(grafana)=

> ### Setting up Grafana

Reviewer 3: I think this should be in metrics.rst like prometheus above?

Author: Currently, the metrics.rst is about "Collecting metrics". Grafana has nothing to do with this CUJ/user task. Grafana is needed for better Dashboard experience and we do have integration with it. That's why we need to mention it here.

Author: Let's keep it as is for now.
